#summary CCF GSoC Application 2011

= Introduction =

CCF is planning to be a Google Summer of Code 2011 organisation.  There is an application to fill in, with the following questions:

== Organization Name == 

Climate Code Foundation

== Description ==

The Climate Code Foundation is a new small non-profit organization with the goal of promoting the public understanding of climate science.  We promote good software engineering practices for scientists, with a key emphasis on Open Source software.  An important part of our work is creating Open Source software, including code which has moved under our umbrella from previous projects.  We write code for data analysis and visualisation in climate science, to present climate science data processing in a clear accessible form, and to help the public understand the structures and systems of climate science (e.g. institutions, publications, funding, etc).

We have been doing open-source climate software (ccc-gistemp) since 2008 - we continue that work within the Foundation.  Our staff have been working as software consultants since 1990, and have been active open-source developers for many years.

Our goals are documented here: http://climatecode.org/about/goals/ and further information can be found at the Foundation home page: http://climatecode.org/

== Home page ==

http://climatecode.org/

== Main Organization License ==

New and simplified BSD licenses

== Why is your organization applying to participate in GSoC 2011? What do you hope to gain by participating? ==

We hope to:
 * improve the public understanding of climate science;
 * promote better practices among climate scientists;
 * foster the Open Source spirit among aspiring students;
 * grow the community around the Foundation;
 * increase the public visibility of the Foundation.

== If accepted, would this be your first year participating in GSoC? ==

Yes

== Did your organization participate in past GSoCs? If so, please summarize your involvement and the successes and challenges of your participation. ==

Not applicable

== If your organization participated in past GSoCs, please let us know the ratio of students passing to students allocated, e.g. 2006: 3/6 for 3 out of 6 students passed in 2006. ==

Not applicable

== What is the URL for your ideas page? ==

http://code.google.com/p/ccc-gistemp/wiki/GSoC2011

== What is the main development mailing list for your organization? This question will be shown to students who would like to get more information about applying to your organization for GSoC 2011. If your organization uses more than one list, please make sure to include a description of the list so students know which to use.==

Most of our software development has been on the "Clear Climate Code GISTEMP" project, which has a Google Groups discussion list:

http://groups.google.com/group/ccc-gistemp-discuss?pli=1

== What is the main IRC channel for your organization? ==

irc://irc.oftc.net/ccf/

(although we don't generally use IRC much).

== Does your organization have an application template you would like to see students use? If so, please provide it now. Please note that it is a very good idea to ask students to provide you with their contact information as part of your template. Their contact details will not be shared with you automatically via the GSoC 2011 site. ==

*About Us*

Thank you for considering the Climate Code Foundation as your mentoring organisation for Google Summer of Code 2011.  We hope to work with you to produce a successful project, increasing public understanding of climate science.

You should submit your proposal in plain text.  Proposals in proprietary formats, including Microsoft Word or PowerPoint, will not be read.

As a small organisation with limited language skills, we are not likely to be able to mentor you successfully unless you are fluent in English.  Also, mentoring is more likely to succeed if you are able to meet us in the UK at least once.  We will require weekly progress updates by email, and will encourage you to be in frequent contact with us throughout the project.

We don't have a "template" as such, with boxes to tick and fields to fill in, but to maximise your chance of working with us in this year's Summer of Code, your application should provide the following information.

*About You*

 * Name and contact information: email, phone, IM, Skype, website?

 * Location, timezone, and language(s).

 * Level of experience in scientific or numeric computation.  Which is your favourite Fortran compiler, and why?  Matlab?  Mathematica?   Numpy/Scipy?  NAG?  Have you written FFT code?  Used a wavelet transform?  Debugged someone else's crufty old data-processing code?

 * Level of experience with open-source software.  Do you know what "open-source" means?  Have you read "the Cathedral and the Bazaar"?  Do you use open-source software tools?  Linux?  GCC?  Eclipse?  Have you contributed to any open-source software before?

 * Level of experience with Python or other open-source languages used by scientists or open-knowledge experts (e.g. R, JavaScript).  Have you used them?  Do you use them regularly in your work or study?

 * Level of education and experience in scientific research.  Can you read and understand a published science research paper?  Have you ever written one?

 * Level of experience in climate science.  Maybe you're a graduate student in atmospheric chemistry?  Or a post-doc working on global circulation models?  Or an undergraduate studying geography?  Maybe your education is not related to climate science, but you have a keen personal interest in the subject.  What have you read?  What do you know?

 * Why are you intending to participate in Google Summer of Code?

 * Why have you chosen the Climate Code Foundation as your mentors for the Summer of Code?

 * What other summer activities are you planning? (for example, travel, workshops, study)

*About your Project*

 * Explain your project proposal.  You don't have to limit yourself to material from our ideas page: we have very broad goals and will look at any proposal which addresses them.

 * What are your project's deliverables?

 * How will your project promote the public understanding of climate science?

 * Does your project require any travel?

 * What are the main risks to the success of your project?  All projects have risks; it is important to identify them and tackle them early.  Are there resources you will need which you might not have access to?  Integrations with other pieces of software which might not go smoothly?

 * What support will your project require, aside from regular mentoring feedback?

== What criteria did you use to select the individuals who will act as mentors for your organization? Please be as specific as possible. ==

The criteria we used were:

 * availability;
 * commitment to the goals of the Foundation;
 * track record in managing software projects;
 * technical expertise in the relevant areas.

Our proposed mentors include the directors of the Foundation.

== What is your plan for dealing with disappearing students? ==

As software contractors and consultants we have long experience of software subcontract management.  The key risk in that area is non-delivery, and the key activity to reduce that risk is regular interaction, tracking and oversight.

We think abrupt disappearance of a student is unlikely.  Far more likely is gradual disaffection or failure to progress, leading to eventual "disappearance".

If a student is losing interest or motivation, or not progressing with the project, we need to discover this and take action as soon as possible.  With that in mind, we will request detailed email progress updates from students once per week, in addition to more-frequent informal interaction (email, IM, phone).  Through this interaction we can identify problems early and take action accordingly.

If a student is losing interest in their project, or finds that they lack a necessary skill or resource, we will help him or her to find alternative ways of moving forward.  Our organisation goals are very broad, and there are many different project outcomes which could promote those goals.  We are long-standing advocates of evolutionary development: specifications should always evolve over the course of a project.  A project which exactly meets an initial specification is less use than one which has evolved over time to meet an improved specification.

Regarding abrupt disappearance of a student, or the eventual finding that a student cannot develop their project into something which suits both the students and ourselves, we note that none of our project ideas are critical to the success of the Foundation, so ultimately if a project fails our organization is not at risk.

== What is your plan for dealing with disappearing mentors? ==

It is most likely that the mentors will be Foundation staff, in  which case there is negligible likelihood that they will disappear.  It is possible that a mentor will be a US academic associated with the Open Climate Project.  In either case, we have backup mentors, and we expect most communications to be shared so that other mentors can be kept up to speed should they need to step in.

== What steps will you take to encourage students to interact with your project's community before, during and after the program? ==

 * Before: we are already in contact with ten potential students, after announcing our possible involvement in GSoC2011 on our blog and a couple of climate-science mailing lists.  We expect more to appear once the Foundation is accepted as a mentoring organisation.  Students are free to join our ccc-gistemp mailing list, and after confirmation as a mentoring organisation, we will encourage potential students to do so, as well as establishing a gsoc2011@climatecode.org mailing list. We will work with students in project proposal development.

After project selection, we will contact selected students directly and engage with them individually, inviting them to meet us in person and chatting with them by IM as they find their way around our existing code base or the problem domain of their project.  We will create individual per-project mailing lists @climatecode.org, to be cc'ed on all project-specific email.

 * During: As detailed above, we will require weekly email progress updates, and encourage more frequent chats via email, IM, or phone.  For students in Western Europe, we may be able to meet in person once or twice during the project.  For some projects (for instance, our Climate Code Directory idea), we may be taking part in software development alongside the student.

 * After: For successful projects with ongoing post-project development work, we would certainly keep the per-project mailing list running, and encourage the student to remain on it.  Many of our project ideas will connect naturally with parts of the climate science community, and we expect students on such projects will form networks through that.

 * Long-term: We hope to take part in GSoC again in future years, and would encourage any successful student to re-apply.  Some projects may be routes into professional climate science.

== If you are a small or new organization applying to GSoC, please list a larger, established GSoC organization or a Googler that can vouch for you here. ==

Richard Tucker <richardt@google.com> has known all of us for many years and will vouch for us.
Greg Wilson of Software Carpentry has mentored every year for various projects (e.g. Python Software Foundation) and will vouch for us.
Bugzilla.org (Gerv Markham) will vouch for us.

== If you are a large organization who is vouching for a small organization applying to GSoC for their first time this year, please list their name and why you think they'd be good candidates for GSoC here: ==

Not applicable.

== Anything else you'd like to tell us? ==

By supporting the Climate Code Foundation through Google Summer of Code, Google will improve the public understanding of climate science, which we hope may have very positive consequences for humanity.