#summary Google Summer of Code 2013 Ideas Page [DRAFT]

= Introduction =

_If GSoC 2013 happens, and CCF is accepted, this will one day be our ideas page_

This is the Climate Code Foundation's list of projects and ideas for Google Summer of Code 2013 (GSoC).  GSoC is a programme funded by Google where students work on open source projects and earn a stipend for doing so.  For more about GSoC, see their website (_link will be put here_).

Please discuss these projects and make suggestions on the <a href="http://mailman.climatecode.org/mailman/listinfo/gsoc-2013">mailing list</a>. _which doesn't exist yet_

*Proposals from students who have not shown up on the mailing list to discuss their ideas will probably be rejected.*    We strongly recommend that you discuss your ideas on the mailing list, so we can help you to devise a strong proposal.

*Proposals which are cut-and-paste from this list will be rejected.*  None of these ideas are detailed enough to make a project proposal. They are just starting points. Some of them, as they stand, are far too small to form a suitable project.  In contrast, some of them are far too large and wide-ranging to be completed in a single GSoC project.   They are just sketches of the directions in which we want to move.

*Late proposals will not be considered.*  Although the Climate Code Foundation is always interested in proposals and contributions which advance our goal, to promote the public understanding of climate science, the Google Summer of Code is run by Google, and is very strict about deadlines.  We have no influence.  Follow the rules, and meet the deadlines, or you will not take part.

*To make a proposal, you need to follow the instructions on the GSoC2013Template page.*  In particular: note that you will need to register at the main GSoCweb site, and submit your proposal through that site.  Email with the Climate Code Foundation, or on our mailing lists, or any other kind of communication with us, will not get you into GSoC.  Again, the program is run by Google.

*We are happy to consider proposals which are not from this list, especially from earth sciences students.*  If you have an active interest relating to the Foundation's goals (promoting the public understanding of climate science) then a project based on that is more likely to succeed.

== ideas will appear below here ==