#summary Template for student applications for Google Summer of Code 2013

_If GSoC 2013 happens, and CCF is accepted, this will one day be our application template page_

==Introduction==

Thank you for considering the Climate Code Foundation as your mentoring organisation for Google Summer of Code 2013.  We hope to work with you to produce a successful project, increasing public understanding of climate science.

This document lays out the requirements for taking part in GSoC with the CCF, and includes a template for project proposals.  The intended readership is CCF GSoC student applicants and mentors, and also anyone interested in CCF GSoC projects.  This document is copyright Climate Code Foundation 2012, and is licensed CC-BY.

==Requirements==

*Google have a number of requirements for students to take part in GSoC.  Those are not negotiable.*  The key ones are that you must be over 18 and a student affiliated to an accredited degree-awarding institution.  But there are others: your first job is to go and find out what they are.

*Proposals from students who have not shown up on the mailing list to discuss their ideas will probably be rejected.*    We strongly recommend that you join <a href="http://mailman.climatecode.org/mailman/listinfo/gsoc-2013">our GSoC 2013 mailing list</a> _which doesn't exist yet_, and discuss your ideas there, so we can help you to devise a strong proposal.

*Proposals which are cut-and-paste from the ideas list will be rejected.*  None of these ideas are detailed enough to make a project proposal. They are just starting points. Some of them, as they stand, are far too small to form a suitable project.  In contrast, some of them are far too large and wide-ranging to be completed in a single GSoC project.   They are just sketches of the directions in which we want to move.

*Late proposals will not be considered.*  Although the Climate Code Foundation is always interested in proposals and contributions which advance our goal, to promote the public understanding of climate science, the Google Summer of Code is run by Google, and is very strict about deadlines.  We have no influence.  Follow the rules, and meet the deadlines, or you will not take part.

*Proposals that don't follow Google's rules will not be considered*.  In particular: note that you will need to register at the main GSoC web site, and submit your proposal through that site.  Email with the Climate Code Foundation, or on our mailing lists, or any other kind of communication with us, will not get you into GSoC.  Again, the program is run by Google.

*We are happy to consider proposals which are not from our ideas list, especially from earth sciences students.*  If you have an active interest relating to the Foundation's goals (promoting the public understanding of climate science) then a project based on that is more likely to succeed.

To maximize your chance of having your proposal accepted by the Foundation, and your project funded by Google:

  * You should be fluent in written and spoken English.
  * Read [http://code.google.com/p/ccc-gistemp/wiki/GSoC2013 the ideas page], and come up with a set of ideas which (a) looks about right for a summer's project, and (b) suits your interests and abilities.
  * Join the mailing list, introduce yourself, and start a discussion of your ideas.
  * Join [irc://irc.oftc.net/ccf our IRC channel] and hang out there.  We don't use IRC much outside of GSoC, and you might find it's very quiet sometimes, but we use it a lot during GSoC and we're likely to be there occasionally during the proposal period.
  * Participate in email and IRC discussions until we have agreed a clear proposal outline.
  *  On the GSoC website, submit a plain-text proposal, providing the information listed below.  Proposals in proprietary formats such as Word or PDF will be unlikely to succeed.

If your proposal is accepted and your project is funded:

  * You must submit daily progress reports during the work period.  These can be trivial (e.g. a subversion changelog, a two-line IM, a 30-second Skype chat).  "daily" means on five separate days each week.  Missing one or two is no big deal.
  * You must send weekly email progress reports, unless excused in advance.
  * You must attend a weekly all-hands GSoC meeting, taking about 90 minutes, held on [irc://irc.oftc.net/ccf our IRC channel], unless excused in advance.
  * You must write at least three posts for [http://climatecode.org/ the Foundation blog], probably one at the beginning of the summer, one at the midterm point, and one at the end.  See the blog for examples from last year.

And of course you must write code, take part in our community, and complete your project.  We are well aware that project requirements and scopes change as a project progresses - these changes should be discussed and agreed with your mentor(s), but we _won't_ fail a student on a technicality in the small print of a project proposal.  However, students who don't submit their progress reports or who otherwise seem to be dropping out, or not progressing, _will_ be chased, and if they don't shape up, they _will_ be failed, and _will not_ receive payments from Google.

==Information we require about you==

Your proposal should include this information about you:

 * Name, contact information: email, phone, IM, IRC handle, Skype? website?

 * Institution and level of education.

 * Location, timezone, and language(s).

 * Level of experience in scientific or numeric computation.  For example: Which is your favourite Fortran compiler, and why?  Matlab?  IDL? Mathematica?   Numpy/Scipy?  NAG?  Have you written FFT code?  Used a wavelet transform?  Debugged someone else's crufty old data-processing code?

 * Level of experience with open-source software.  For example: Do you know what "open-source" means?  Have you read "the Cathedral and the Bazaar"?  Do you use open-source software tools?  Linux?  GCC?  Eclipse?  Have you contributed to any open-source software before?

 * Level of experience with Python or other open-source languages used by scientists or open-knowledge experts (e.g. R, JavaScript).  Have you used them?  Do you use them regularly in your work or study?

 * Level of education and experience in scientific research.  Can you read and understand a published science research paper?  Do you do that often?  Have you ever written one?

 * Level of experience in climate science.  Maybe you're a graduate student in atmospheric chemistry?  Or a post-doc working on global circulation models?  Or an undergraduate studying geography?  Maybe your education is not related to climate science, but you have a keen personal interest in the subject.  What have you read?  What do you know?

 * Why are you intending to participate in Google Summer of Code?

 * Why have you chosen the Climate Code Foundation as your mentors for the Summer of Code?

 * What other summer activities are you planning? (for example, travel, workshops, study)

==Information we require about your project==

Your proposal should include this information about your project:

 * Explain your project proposal.  You don't have to limit yourself to material from our ideas page: we have very broad goals and will look at any proposal which addresses them.

 * What is your project plan?  What are your project's deliverables?  On what dates during the summer do you expect to produce them?

 * How will your project integrate with existing bodies of code?

 * How will your project promote the public understanding of climate science?

 * Does your project require any travel?

 * What are the main risks to the success of your project?  All projects have risks; it is important to identify them and tackle them early.  Are there resources you will need which you might not have access to?  Integrations with other pieces of software which might not go smoothly?

 * Who would be the ideal mentor for your project?  Should you have a scientist mentor?  A programming mentor?  Both?

 * What support will your project require, aside from regular mentoring feedback?